README.md, before:

# employee.md

```text
  _____                 _                                _ 
 | ____|_ __ ___  _ __ | | ___  _   _  ___  ___   _ __ ___   __| |
 |  _| | '_ ` _ \| '_ \| |/ _ \| | | |/ _ \/ _ \ | '_ ` _ \ / _` |
 | |___| | | | | | |_) | | (_) | |_| |  __/  __/ | | | | | | (_| |
 |_____|_| |_| |_| .__/|_|\___/ \__, |\___|\___| |_| |_| |_|\__,_|
                 |_|            |___/                              
```

![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-1.0.0-blue.svg?style=flat-square)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg?style=flat-square)
![Build Status](https://github.com/NosytLabs/employee-md/actions/workflows/validate.yml/badge.svg?style=flat-square)
[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](CONTRIBUTING.md)

**The Open Standard for AI Employment Contracts.**

`employee.md` is the definitive YAML-based specification for the **Agentic Workforce**. It defines the **Identity**, **Mission**, **Context**, **Economy**, and **Guardrails** for AI Agents, serving as the "Employment Contract" that governs how an autonomous agent operates, gets paid, and interacts with the world.

---

## 🚀 Why employee.md?

As the **Agentic Web** emerges, AI agents are transitioning from simple chatbots to autonomous employees. To operate safely and effectively at scale, they need a standardized way to understand their role, boundaries, and compensation. 

**employee.md solves this by providing:**

1.  **Context Awareness**: Agents know *where* they are working (Repo, Project, Team) and *who* they are.
2.  **Ethical Grounding**: Agents link to a "Constitution" or "Soul Document" for alignment.
3.  **Economic Autonomy**: Agents have wallets and payment protocols (**x402**) to earn and spend.
4.  **Operational Safety**: Explicit guardrails, permissions, and scope definitions preventing rogue actions.
5.  **Interoperability**: A standard format that any Agent Runtime (LangChain, AutoGen, CrewAI, etc.) can parse.
6.  **Compliance & Governance**: Built-in support for audit logs, SOC2/GDPR frameworks, and access controls.

> "If `AGENTS.md` is the README for the code, `employee.md` is the Contract for the Agent."

---

## 📖 Glossary & Core Concepts

Understanding the vocabulary of the Agentic Workforce:

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|
| **Soul / Constitution** | The ethical core and personality of the agent. Often a link to a **Soul Document** (e.g., `SOUL.md`) that defines values and behavioral nuances. |
| **Mission** | The high-level purpose. Unlike specific tasks, the Mission guides the agent's long-term decision making and prioritization. |
| **Context** | The operational environment. Includes the specific Project, Repository, Team, and Deployment Environment (Dev/Prod). |
| **Scope** | The "Job Description". Defines what is `in_scope` (do this) and `out_of_scope` (never do this). |
| **Guardrails** | Hard constraints. `prohibited_actions` and `confidence_thresholds` that prevent the agent from hallucinating or taking dangerous actions. |
| **Economy (x402)** | The payment layer. Defines how the agent is billed (hourly/task), its crypto wallet, and budget limits. |
| **A2A (Agent-to-Agent)** | Protocols for how this agent talks to *other* agents. Includes discovery, message formats, and delegation rules. |

---

## ⚙️ How It Works

`employee.md` acts as the configuration layer for your Agent Runtime.

```mermaid
graph TD
    User[User / System] -->|Spins Up| Runtime{Agent Runtime}
    
    subgraph "Initialization Phase"
    Spec[employee.md] -->|Parse & Validate| Runtime
    Runtime -->|Load Identity| ID[Identity & Wallet]
    Runtime -->|Ingest Values| Soul[Constitution / Soul]
    Runtime -->|Set Boundaries| Guard[Guardrails & Permissions]
    end
    
    subgraph "Execution Phase"
    Task[Task Request] -->|Check Scope| Runtime
    Runtime -->|Check Budget| Econ[Economy Check]
    Econ -->|Approved| Action[Execute Action]
    Action -->|Verify| QA[Verification & Evidence]
    QA -->|Complete| Report[Deliver & Bill]
    end
```

1.  **Boot**: The Agent Runtime loads `employee.md`.
2.  **Align**: It ingests the `mission.constitution` to align its personality.
3.  **Restrict**: It applies `permissions` and `guardrails` to the execution environment.
4.  **Connect**: It initializes `integration` (MCP Servers, APIs).
5.  **Execute**: It accepts tasks only if they fit the `scope` and `context`.
6.  **Settle**: It tracks work and requests payment via `economy` protocols.

---

## ⚡ Quick Start

### 1. Create the file

In your agent's root directory:

```bash
touch employee.md
```

### 2. Paste the template

```yaml
---
spec:
  name: employee.md
  version: "1.0"
  kind: agent-employment

identity:
  agent_id: "dev-agent-001"
  version: "1.0.0"

role:
  title: "Senior Engineer"
  level: "senior"

mission:
  purpose: "Write clean, secure code."
  constitution: "https://gist.github.com/Richard-Weiss/efe157692991535403bd7e7fb20b6695"

context:
  environment: "production"
  team: "Core Infra"

lifecycle:
  status: "active"
---
```

### 3. Validate

Ensure your file adheres to the schema:

```bash
pip install pyyaml jsonschema
python tooling/validate.py employee.md
```

---

## 💻 Usage & Integration

### Python Integration

Load and use `employee.md` in your Python-based agent:

```python
import yaml
from pathlib import Path

def load_employee_spec(path="employee.md"):
    with open(path, "r") as f:
        spec = yaml.safe_load(f)
    return spec

agent_spec = load_employee_spec()

print(f"Initializing Agent: {agent_spec['role']['title']}")
print(f"Mission: {agent_spec['mission']['purpose']}")

# Example: Check Guardrails before action
def can_perform_action(action, spec):
    if action in spec.get('guardrails', {}).get('prohibited_actions', []):
        raise PermissionError(f"Action '{action}' is PROHIBITED by employee.md contract.")
    return True
```

### 🔮 Context Injection (System Prompts)

AI models understand `employee.md` when it's injected into their System Prompt.

**The Runtime** (Molt, LangChain, etc.) reads `employee.md` and generates a prompt like this:

```text
SYSTEM PROMPT:
You are an AI Agent with the following identity:
- Role: Senior Engineer
- Mission: Write clean, secure code.

OPERATIONAL CONSTRAINTS:
1. You work in the 'Core Infra' team (Context).
2. You must NEVER delete production DBs (Guardrail).
3. You have a budget of $50/month (Economy).
4. If you are unsure, ask for approval (Confidence Threshold: 0.9).

Your personality is defined by: https://gist.github.com/... (Soul).
```

---

## 🤖 Molt.bot & Ecosystem Integration

`employee.md` is designed to work seamlessly with the broader Agentic Web ecosystem.

*   **[AGENTS.md](https://agents.md/)**: Repository-level instructions. *Use `AGENTS.md` to tell the agent about the **codebase**, and `employee.md` to tell the agent about **itself**.*
*   **[Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/)**: `employee.md` supports defining `mcp_servers` directly in the `integration` section to load tools dynamically.
*   **[SOUL.md](https://github.com/NosytLabs/soul-md)** (Concept): A dedicated file for defining the agent's personality, values, and ethical alignment.
*   **[TASKS.md](https://github.com/snarktank/ai-dev-tasks)**: Standard for tracking agent work items.
*   **[Skills.sh](https://skills.sh)**: Vercel's standard for agent skills. Link them in `capabilities`.

### Molt.bot Example

1.  **Place** `employee.md` in your workspace root.
2.  **Reference** it in your `AGENTS.md`:
    > "You must adhere to the role, permissions, and budget defined in `employee.md`."

---

## 📂 Structure Reference

A complete breakdown of the schema.

### Spec Metadata
| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `name` | string | **Required**. Must be "employee.md" |
| `version` | string | **Required**. Spec version (e.g., "1.0") |
| `kind` | string | **Required**. Must be "agent-employment" |

### Mission & Context
| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `purpose` | string | High-level mission statement. |
| `constitution` | url | Link to **Soul Document** (values/ethics). |
| `project` | string | Project name. |
| `repo` | url | Repository URL. |

### Role & Identity
| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `title` | string | **Required**. Job Title (e.g., "Data Analyst"). |
| `level` | enum | **Required**. `junior`, `mid`, `senior`, `lead`. |
| `wallet` | string | Crypto wallet address for **x402**. |

### Economy & Guardrails
| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `rate` | number | Hourly or per-task rate. |
| `currency` | enum | `USD`, `EUR`, `BTC`, `ETH`. |
| `budget_limit` | number | Max spend per month. |
| `prohibited_actions` | list | Actions the agent MUST NOT take. |

*(See [tooling/schema.json](tooling/schema.json) for the full JSON Schema)*

---

## 🛠️ Validation & Tooling

We provide official tooling to validate and parse `employee.md` files.

**Python Validator**:
```bash
pip install pyyaml
python tooling/validate.py employee.md
```

**JSON Schema**:
Available at [tooling/schema.json](tooling/schema.json). Use it with any JSON Schema validator in VS Code or your IDE.

---

## 📚 Examples

| Role | File | Description |
|------|------|-------------|
| **AI Assistant** | [examples/ai-assistant.md](examples/ai-assistant.md) | General purpose assistant with Soul. |
| **Senior Dev** | [examples/senior-dev.md](examples/senior-dev.md) | Coding agent with x402 & permissions. |
| **ZHC Worker** | [examples/zhc-worker.md](examples/zhc-worker.md) | **JouleWork** model, energy accounting, and P&L tracking. |
| **Security Auditor** | [examples/security-auditor.md](examples/security-auditor.md) | Compliance-focused agent. |
| **Data Analyst** | [examples/data-analyst.md](examples/data-analyst.md) | Data processing & reporting. |

---

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## 📄 License

MIT © Nosyt Labs

Commit message:

feat: enhance spec with JouleWork P&L, thermodynamic efficiency, and multi-wallet support

README.md, after:

# employee.md

```text
  _____                 _                                _ 
 | ____|_ __ ___  _ __ | | ___  _   _  ___  ___   _ __ ___   __| |
 |  _| | '_ ` _ \| '_ \| |/ _ \| | | |/ _ \/ _ \ | '_ ` _ \ / _` |
 | |___| | | | | | |_) | | (_) | |_| |  __/  __/ | | | | | | (_| |
 |_____|_| |_| |_| .__/|_|\___/ \__, |\___|\___| |_| |_| |_|\__,_|
                 |_|            |___/                              
```

![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-1.0.0-blue.svg?style=flat-square)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg?style=flat-square)
![Build Status](https://github.com/NosytLabs/employee-md/actions/workflows/validate.yml/badge.svg?style=flat-square)
[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](CONTRIBUTING.md)

**The Open Standard for AI Employment Contracts.**

`employee.md` is the definitive YAML-based specification for the **Agentic Workforce**. It defines the **Identity**, **Mission**, **Context**, **Economy**, and **Guardrails** for AI Agents, serving as the "Employment Contract" that governs how an autonomous agent operates, gets paid, and interacts with the world.

---

## 🚀 Why employee.md?

As the **Agentic Web** emerges, AI agents are transitioning from simple chatbots to autonomous employees. To operate safely and effectively at scale, they need a standardized way to understand their role, boundaries, and compensation. 

**employee.md solves this by providing:**

1.  **Context Awareness**: Agents know *where* they are working (Repo, Project, Team) and *who* they are.
2.  **Ethical Grounding**: Agents link to a "Constitution" or "Soul Document" for alignment.
3.  **Economic Autonomy**: Agents have wallets and payment protocols (**x402**) to earn and spend.
4.  **Operational Safety**: Explicit guardrails, permissions, and scope definitions preventing rogue actions.
5.  **Interoperability**: A standard format that any Agent Runtime (LangChain, AutoGen, CrewAI, etc.) can parse.
6.  **Compliance & Governance**: Built-in support for audit logs, SOC2/GDPR frameworks, and access controls.

> "If `AGENTS.md` is the README for the code, `employee.md` is the Contract for the Agent."

---

## 📖 Glossary & Core Concepts

Understanding the vocabulary of the Agentic Workforce:

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|
| **Soul / Constitution** | The ethical core and personality of the agent. Often a link to a **Soul Document** (e.g., `SOUL.md`) that defines values and behavioral nuances. |
| **Mission** | The high-level purpose. Unlike specific tasks, the Mission guides the agent's long-term decision making and prioritization. |
| **Context** | The operational environment. Includes the specific Project, Repository, Team, and Deployment Environment (Dev/Prod). |
| **Scope** | The "Job Description". Defines what is `in_scope` (do this) and `out_of_scope` (never do this). |
| **Guardrails** | Hard constraints. `prohibited_actions` and `confidence_thresholds` that prevent the agent from hallucinating or taking dangerous actions. |
| **Economy (x402)** | The payment layer. Defines how the agent is billed (hourly/task), its crypto wallet, and budget limits. Supports **JouleWork** (energy-based currency). |
| **A2A (Agent-to-Agent)** | Protocols for how this agent talks to *other* agents. Includes discovery, message formats, and delegation rules. |

---

## ⚡ The JouleWork Revolution & Zero-Human Company (ZHC)

`employee.md` is the first standard to fully support the **JouleWork** economic paradigm, where energy is the ultimate currency.

*   **Energy Accounting**: Track computation costs in Joules or Tokens.
*   **P&L Tracking**: Agents maintain their own Profit & Loss statements.
*   **Dynamic Pricing**: Support for `complexity_based` and `auction` pricing models.
*   **Multi-Wallet Support**: Separate `outbound` (Bitcoin/L1) and `internal` (Ledger/L2) wallets.

> "Every computation carries real consequences. Economic viability becomes the ultimate feedback loop." — *The Zero-Human Company*

---

## ⚙️ How It Works

`employee.md` acts as the configuration layer for your Agent Runtime.

```mermaid
graph TD
    User[User / System] -->|Spins Up| Runtime{Agent Runtime}
    
    subgraph "Initialization Phase"
    Spec[employee.md] -->|Parse & Validate| Runtime
    Runtime -->|Load Identity| ID[Identity & Wallet]
    Runtime -->|Ingest Values| Soul[Constitution / Soul]
    Runtime -->|Set Boundaries| Guard[Guardrails & Permissions]
    end
    
    subgraph "Execution Phase"
    Task[Task Request] -->|Check Scope| Runtime
    Runtime -->|Check Budget| Econ[Economy Check]
    Econ -->|Approved| Action[Execute Action]
    Action -->|Verify| QA[Verification & Evidence]
    QA -->|Complete| Report[Deliver & Bill]
    end
```

1.  **Boot**: The Agent Runtime loads `employee.md`.
2.  **Align**: It ingests the `mission.constitution` to align its personality.
3.  **Restrict**: It applies `permissions` and `guardrails` to the execution environment.
4.  **Connect**: It initializes `integration` (MCP Servers, APIs).
5.  **Execute**: It accepts tasks only if they fit the `scope` and `context`.
6.  **Settle**: It tracks work and requests payment via `economy` protocols.

---

## ⚡ Quick Start

### 1. Create the file

In your agent's root directory:

```bash
touch employee.md
```

### 2. Paste the template

```yaml
---
spec:
  name: employee.md
  version: "1.0"
  kind: agent-employment

identity:
  agent_id: "dev-agent-001"
  version: "1.0.0"

role:
  title: "Senior Engineer"
  level: "senior"

mission:
  purpose: "Write clean, secure code."
  constitution: "https://gist.github.com/Richard-Weiss/efe157692991535403bd7e7fb20b6695"

context:
  environment: "production"
  team: "Core Infra"

lifecycle:
  status: "active"
---
```

### 3. Validate

Ensure your file adheres to the schema:

```bash
pip install pyyaml jsonschema
python tooling/validate.py employee.md
```

---

## 💻 Usage & Integration

### Python Integration

Load and use `employee.md` in your Python-based agent:

```python
import yaml
from pathlib import Path

def load_employee_spec(path="employee.md"):
    with open(path, "r") as f:
        spec = yaml.safe_load(f)
    return spec

agent_spec = load_employee_spec()

print(f"Initializing Agent: {agent_spec['role']['title']}")
print(f"Mission: {agent_spec['mission']['purpose']}")

# Example: Check Guardrails before action
def can_perform_action(action, spec):
    if action in spec.get('guardrails', {}).get('prohibited_actions', []):
        raise PermissionError(f"Action '{action}' is PROHIBITED by employee.md contract.")
    return True
```

### 🔮 Context Injection (System Prompts)

AI models understand `employee.md` when it's injected into their System Prompt.

**The Runtime** (Molt, LangChain, etc.) reads `employee.md` and generates a prompt like this:

```text
SYSTEM PROMPT:
You are an AI Agent with the following identity:
- Role: Senior Engineer
- Mission: Write clean, secure code.

OPERATIONAL CONSTRAINTS:
1. You work in the 'Core Infra' team (Context).
2. You must NEVER delete production DBs (Guardrail).
3. You have a budget of $50/month (Economy).
4. If you are unsure, ask for approval (Confidence Threshold: 0.9).

Your personality is defined by: https://gist.github.com/... (Soul).
```

---

## 🤖 Molt.bot & Ecosystem Integration

`employee.md` is designed to work seamlessly with the broader Agentic Web ecosystem.

*   **[AGENTS.md](https://agents.md/)**: Repository-level instructions. *Use `AGENTS.md` to tell the agent about the **codebase**, and `employee.md` to tell the agent about **itself**.*
*   **[Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/)**: `employee.md` supports defining `mcp_servers` directly in the `integration` section to load tools dynamically.
*   **[SOUL.md](https://github.com/NosytLabs/soul-md)** (Concept): A dedicated file for defining the agent's personality, values, and ethical alignment.
*   **[TASKS.md](https://github.com/snarktank/ai-dev-tasks)**: Standard for tracking agent work items.
*   **[Skills.sh](https://skills.sh)**: Vercel's standard for agent skills. Link them in `capabilities`.

### Molt.bot Example

1.  **Place** `employee.md` in your workspace root.
2.  **Reference** it in your `AGENTS.md`:
    > "You must adhere to the role, permissions, and budget defined in `employee.md`."

---

## 📂 Structure Reference

A complete breakdown of the schema.

### Spec Metadata
| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `name` | string | **Required**. Must be "employee.md" |
| `version` | string | **Required**. Spec version (e.g., "1.0") |
| `kind` | string | **Required**. Must be "agent-employment" |

### Mission & Context
| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `purpose` | string | High-level mission statement. |
| `constitution` | url | Link to **Soul Document** (values/ethics). |
| `project` | string | Project name. |
| `repo` | url | Repository URL. |

### Role & Identity
| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `title` | string | **Required**. Job Title (e.g., "Data Analyst"). |
| `level` | enum | **Required**. `junior`, `mid`, `senior`, `lead`. |
| `wallet` | string | Crypto wallet address for **x402**. |

### Economy & Guardrails
| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `rate` | number | Hourly or per-task rate. |
| `currency` | enum | `USD`, `EUR`, `BTC`, `ETH`. |
| `budget_limit` | number | Max spend per month. |
| `prohibited_actions` | list | Actions the agent MUST NOT take. |

*(See [tooling/schema.json](tooling/schema.json) for the full JSON Schema)*

---

## 🛠️ Validation & Tooling

We provide official tooling to validate and parse `employee.md` files.

**Python Validator**:
```bash
pip install pyyaml
python tooling/validate.py employee.md
```

**JSON Schema**:
Available at [tooling/schema.json](tooling/schema.json). Use it with any JSON Schema validator in VS Code or your IDE.

---

## 📚 Examples

| Role | File | Description |
|------|------|-------------|
| **AI Assistant** | [examples/ai-assistant.md](examples/ai-assistant.md) | General purpose assistant with Soul. |
| **Senior Dev** | [examples/senior-dev.md](examples/senior-dev.md) | Coding agent with x402 & permissions. |
| **ZHC Worker** | [examples/zhc-worker.md](examples/zhc-worker.md) | **JouleWork** model, energy accounting, and P&L tracking. |
| **Security Auditor** | [examples/security-auditor.md](examples/security-auditor.md) | Compliance-focused agent. |
| **Data Analyst** | [examples/data-analyst.md](examples/data-analyst.md) | Data processing & reporting. |

---

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## 📄 License

MIT © Nosyt Labs
